"Despite the grimly predictable tragedies of armed conflict, almost all ancient and modern societies studied by anthropologists have engaged in at least periodic bouts of warfare. The ubiquity of organized fighting between human groups has fired up the scientific study of warfare.
Current notions about the roots of war stem mainly from studies of nonindustrial societies lacking centralized political power and extensive military organizations. All of these theoretical approaches focus on three themes:
ultimate causes of war that influence the goals people fight for, such as competition within a society for scarce resources, and intense divisions between groups of related individuals;
proximate causes of war, such as a society’s military preparedness and the goals of its leaders, often centering on the desire for land, natural resources, or control of trade routes; and
consequences of war that influence further conflict, including population decline, improved access to resources, and increased prestige and power accorded to victorious warriors.
Although some anthropologists and sociobiologists contend that a genetic tendency toward physical violence greases the human war machine, theories of innate aggression attract few advocates today. Nevertheless, disputes over the alleged biological roots of combat continue to erupt.
Perhaps the most wide-ranging warfare study to date was conducted during the 1980s by Carol R. Ember and Melvin Ember. The team analyzed anthropological descriptions of 186 nonindustrial societies, virtually all of which operated on a much smaller scale than modern nation-states. Descriptions ranged from eighteenth-century writings on Native American tribes to recent accounts of African hunter-gatherers. Two independent coders read the voluminous literature and rated the presence and frequency of warfare, aggressive acts, natural disasters, and other social and psychological factors, focusing on a twenty-five-year period in each society.The Embers say that their findings offer a tentative theory of war: The societies that engage in the most warfare express considerably more fear of food shortages caused by expected but unpredictable natural disasters, such as drought, flood, or infestation. The fear of others—indicated by child-rearing practices stressing mistrust of neighbors—further fuels the tendency to fight, the researchers say.
Some researchers have suggested a penchant for warfare among societies with high levels of interpersonal aggression, as reflected in elevated rates of murder and theft. The Embers’ study showed no such links. Parents in warlike societies do tend to encourage toughness and aggression among boys, but warfare apparently causes this practice rather than vice versa, the Embers argue. When these societies lose wars and come under the control of outside forces, harsh child-rearing methods diminish sharply, they found.
“War is not the natural human condition,” anthropologist R. Brian Ferguson says. “Research shows that war varies over time due to factors such as trade, population growth, and outside contacts.” Often, leaders must paint the enemy as inhuman in order to motivate people to kill, he says—and even then, many soldiers come out of combat with severe psychological aftereffects. “We need to dispense with the idea that people love violence and are doomed to fight.”