"The depiction of fictional violence on television deserves much less criticism than it has received in the United States. Trite or not, scenes of imaginary violence are almost always orchestrated by high production values: filled with changing camera shots, intricately edited. This finely wrought symbolic material has endured for decades because of viewers’ preferences—not because of what people say they want but because of what they actually watch.
Perhaps, to give television violence its due, we need first to acknowledge the complex, sometimes violent content of our inner lives. Parents want to know why young children love to view violent superheroes struggling against imaginary antagonists. They make the choice because of an inner need for such turbulent content—a need that deserves to be acknowledged. Consider that to be six years old is to be essentially powerless in the world of human affairs; even turning a door handle can be a challenge. Through imaginary violence, however, the child viewer becomes momentarily omnipotent, transcending all obstacles of an oversized world.
Who opposes these experiences? Parents, of course. But it is in the halls of Congress that the attack invariably crystallizes. Nebulous concerns about video mayhem afloat among the public, plus a collection of published “scientific” studies, are forged by astute politicians into an issue of immediate concern. While many congressional items are too dull to inspire reportage, this controversy is well covered by the press, bringing the senator’s or representative’s name and image into households throughout the country. Their fame is linked to an immaculate concern—the purification of American family life. The senator or representative is depicting himself or herself as a savior, purer than pure.
Scholars play a pivotal role in this war of words: they are the munitions makers—though they would dislike the label. Granted that a close reading of their total corpus reveals little consensus, there are enough studies with the “right” findings to provide ample ammunition for reformists. These studies are taken to legitimize the assault on television programs that contain violent plots; they are cited in every attacking document and speech. Scholars promulgate the antiviolence position by arguing for it in their lectures and other public utterances and, indirectly, by not contradicting the conventional antiviolence wisdom on the topic.
On television violence, professors as a rule have been needlessly shortsighted. If they had stood back and examined television violence in its long-term historical context and seen where this matter ranks alongside the recurring atrocities in human history, then they would have realized that television violence is a relatively minor happenstance. Its appearance suggests an improvement in the human condition, not a deterioration: a harmless way of sublimating, or distancing, those normal feelings of powerlessness or anger or frustration or aggression that well-adjusted human beings vent in a civilized society through vicarious means. From such material fairy tales and folktales once originated, captivating some of the same generations that now demonstrate the most vigilance in filtering out violent content from their children’s television fare.
What can be asked for here is that the public and the scholarly community apply a high level of intellect to the issue of television violence. Both the historical and the scientific evidence need to be sorted through very carefully. We need to ask new questions and do new studies probing such questions as why some societies heavily dependent on American television programming have much lower rates of violent crime. Only then can there be a full understanding of the role of television violence in the lives of modern human beings."
  